Tips
****

.. currentmodule:: apsw

These tips are based on mailing list postings.  You are recommended to
read all the documentation as well.

SQLite is different
===================

While SQLite provides a SQL database like many others out there, it is
also unique in many ways.  Read about the unique features at the
`SQLite website <https://sqlite.org/different.html>`__.

Cursors
=======

SQLite only calculates each result row as you request it.  For example
if your query returns 10 million rows SQLite will not calculate all 10
million up front.  Instead the next row will be calculated as you ask
for it.

Cursors on the same :ref:`Connection <connections>` are not isolated
from each other.  Anything done on one cursor is immediately visible
to all other Cursors on the same connection.  This still applies if
you start transactions.  Connections are isolated from each other.

Read more about :ref:`Cursors <cursors>`.

Bindings
========

When using a cursor, always use bindings.  `String interpolation
<http://docs.python.org/library/stdtypes.html#string-formatting-operations>`_
may seem more convenient but you will encounter difficulties.  You may
feel that you have complete control over all data accessed but if your
code is at all useful then you will find it being used more and more
widely.  The computer will always be better than you at parsing SQL
and the bad guys have years of experience finding and using `SQL
injection attacks <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL_injection>`_ in
ways you never even thought possible.

The :ref:`documentation <cursors>` gives many examples of how to use
various forms of bindings.

Unicode
=======

SQLite only stores text as Unicode.  However it relies on SQLite API
users to provide valid UTF-8 and does not double check.  (APSW only
provides valid UTF-8).  It is possible using other wrappers and tools
to cause invalid UTF-8 to appear in the database which will then cause
retrieval errors.  You can work around this by using the SQL *CAST*
operator.  For example::

  SELECT id, CAST(label AS blob) from table

Then proceed to give the `Joel Unicode article
<http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/Unicode.html>`_ to all people
involved.

.. _diagnostics_tips:

Diagnostics
===========

Both SQLite and APSW provide detailed diagnostic information.  Errors
will be signalled via an :doc:`exception <exceptions>`.

APSW ensures you have :ref:`detailed information
<augmentedstacktraces>` both in the stack trace as well as what data
APSW/SQLite was operating on.

SQLite has a `warning/error logging facility
<http://www.sqlite.org/errlog.html>`__.  To set your own logger use::

    def handler(errcode, message):
        errstr=apsw.mapping_result_codes[errcode & 255]
        extended=errcode & ~ 255
        print "SQLITE_LOG: %s (%d) %s %s" % (message, errcode, errstr, apsw.mapping_extended_result_codes.get(extended, ""))

    apsw.config(apsw.SQLITE_CONFIG_LOG, handler)

.. note::

   The handler **must** be set before any other calls to SQLite.
   Once SQLite is initialised you cannot change the logger - a
   :exc:`MisuseError` will happen (this restriction is in SQLite not
   APSW).

This is an example of what gets printed when I use ``/dev/null`` as
the database name in the :class:`Connection` and then tried to create
a table.::

    SQLITE_LOG: cannot open file at line 28729 of [7dd4968f23] (14) SQLITE_CANTOPEN
    SQLITE_LOG: os_unix.c:28729: (2) open(/dev/null-journal) - No such file or directory (14) SQLITE_CANTOPEN
    SQLITE_LOG: statement aborts at 38: [create table foo(x,y);] unable to open database file (14) SQLITE_CANTOPEN

Parsing SQL
===========

Sometimes you want to know what a particular SQL statement does.  The
SQLite query parser directly generates VDBE byte code and cannot be
hooked into.  There is however an easier way.

Make a new :class:`Connection` object making sure the statement cache
is disabled (size zero).  Install an :ref:`execution tracer
<executiontracer>` that returns ``apsw.SQLITE_DENY`` which will
prevent any queries from running.  Install an :meth:`authorizer
<Connection.setauthorizer>`.

Then call :meth:`Cursor.execute` on your query.  Your authorizer will
then be called (multiple times if necessary) with details of what the
query does including expanding views and triggers that fire.  Finally
the execution tracer will fire.  If the query string had multiple
statements then the execution tracer lets you know how long the first
statement was.

Unexpected behaviour
====================

Occasionally you may get different results than you expected.  Before
littering your code with *print*, try :ref:`apswtrace <apswtrace>`
with all options turned on to see exactly what is going on. You can
also use the :ref:`SQLite shell <shell>` to dump the contents of your
database to a text file.  For example you could dump it before and
after a run to see what changed.

One fairly common gotcha is using double quotes instead of single
quotes.  (This wouldn't be a problem if you use bindings!)  SQL
strings use single quotes.  If you use double quotes then it will
mostly appear to work, but they are intended to be used for
identifiers such as column names.  For example if you have a column
named ``a b`` (a space b) then you would need to use::

  SELECT "a b" from table

If you use double quotes and happen to use a string whose contents are
the same as a table, alias, column etc then unexpected results will
occur.

Customizing cursors
===================

Some developers want to customize the behaviour of cursors.  An
example would be wanting a :ref:`rowcount <rowcount>` or batching returned rows.
(These don't make any sense with SQLite but the desire may be to make
the code source compatible with other database drivers).

APSW does not provide a way to subclass the cursor class or any other
form of factory.  Consequently you will have to subclass the
:class:`Connection` and provide an alternate implementation of
:meth:`Connection.cursor`.  You should encapsulate the APSW cursor -
ie store it as a member of your cursor class and forward calls as
appropriate.  The cursor only has two important methods -
:meth:`Cursor.execute` and :meth:`Cursor.executemany`.

If you want to change the rows returned then use a :ref:`row tracer
<rowtracer>`.  For example you could call
:meth:`Cursor.getdescription` and return a dictionary instead of a
tuple::

  def row_factory(cursor, row):
      return {k[0]: row[i] for i, k in enumerate(cursor.getdescription())}

  # You can also set this on just a cursor
  connection.setrowtrace(row_factory)


.. _busyhandling:

Busy handling
=============

SQLite uses locks to coordinate access to the database by multiple
connections (within the same process or in a different process).  The
general goal is to have the locks be as lax as possible (allowing
concurrency) and when using more restrictive locks to keep them for as
short a time as possible.  See the `SQLite documentation
<https://sqlite.org/lockingv3.html>`__ for more details.

By default you will get a :exc:`BusyError` if a lock cannot be
acquired.  You can set a :meth:`timeout <Connection.setbusytimeout>`
which will keep retrying or a :meth:`callback
<Connection.setbusyhandler>` where you decide what to do.

Database schema
===============

When starting a new database, it can be quite difficult to decide what
tables and fields to have and how to link them.  The technique used to
design SQL schemas is called `normalization
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_normalization>`_.  The page
also shows common pitfalls if you don't normalize your schema.

.. _sharedcache:

Shared Cache Mode
=================

SQLite supports a `shared cache mode
<https://sqlite.org/sharedcache.html>`__ where multiple connections
to the same database can share a cache instead of having their own.
It is not recommended that you use this mode.

A big issue is that :ref:`busy handling <busyhandling>` is not done
the same way.  The timeouts and handlers are ignored and instead
:const:`SQLITE_LOCKED_SHAREDCACHE` extended error is returned.
Consequently you will have to do your own busy handling.  (`SQLite
ticket
<https://sqlite.org/src/tktview/ebde3f66fc64e21e61ef2854ed1a36dfff884a2f>`__,
:issue:`59`)

The amount of memory and I/O saved is trivial compared to Python's
overall memory and I/O consumption.  You may also need to tune the
shared cache's memory back up to what it would have been with separate
connections to get the same performance.

The shared cache mode is targeted at embedded systems where every
byte of memory and I/O matters.  For example an MP3 player may only
have kilobytes of memory available for SQLite.

.. _wal:

Write Ahead Logging
===================

SQLite 3.7 introduces `write ahead logging
<https://sqlite.org/wal.html>`__ which has several benefits, but
also some drawbacks as the page documents.  WAL mode is off by
default.  In addition to turning it on manually for each database, you
can also turn it on for all opened databases by using
:attr:`connection_hooks`::

  def setwal(db):
      db.cursor().execute("pragma journal_mode=wal")
      # custom auto checkpoint interval (use zero to disable)
      db.wal_autocheckpoint(10)

  apsw.connection_hooks.append(setwal)

Note that if wal mode can't be set (eg the database is in memory or
temporary) then the attempt to set wal mode will be ignored.  The
pragma will return the mode in effect.  It is also harmless to call
functions like :meth:`Connection.wal_autocheckpoint` on connections
that are not in wal mode.

If you write your own VFS, then inheriting from an existing VFS that
supports WAL will make your VFS support the extra WAL methods too.
(Your VFS will point directly to the base methods - there is no
indirect call via Python.)
